MSC4089: Delivery Receipts (#4089)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4089-delivery-receipts.md

# MSC4089: Delivery Receipts

A common feature among messaging clients is "delivery receipts". Similar to [read receipts](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#receipts),
delivery receipts denote when a client has received *and* decrypted a given message. They do not
denote whether a user has "seen" that message, such as in a push notification.

In a Digital Markets Act (DMA) world, the need for a protocol to support popular messaging features
rises. This proposal introduces a concept of delivery receipts to Matrix, aiming to be compatible
with potential bridges and protocol converters which need such a feature to operate.

## Proposal

The specification already has a general concept of [receipts](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#receipts),
which is currently in use only by read (or "seen") receipts. We extend this module with a new `m.delivery`
receipt to track individual events being received by the client.

> Delivery receipts are sent by all of a user's clients to report back to the event's sender that an

Reviewer: Do delivery receipts get sent to all of the sender's devices, or just the device that sent the event?

Author: I think I intended this to be all of the sender's devices, but very open to opinions either way.

event was decrypted successfully. They are not "up to" markers - they are for singular events. Other
users in the room do *not* see delivery receipts for events they didn't send.

If an event is not encrypted, a delivery receipt is sent when the client receives the event. If an
event is encrypted but could not be decrypted, no delivery receipt is sent.

**TODO**: We may want to consider an explicit "failed delivery" receipt.

`m.delivery` is part of `m.receipt` as follows:

```jsonc
{
  "type": "m.receipt",
  "content": {
    "$eventid": {
      "m.read": {
        // per spec
      },
      "m.read.private": {
        // per spec
      },
      "m.delivery": {
        "@user:example.org": {

>           "ts": 1661384801651, // same as m.read[.private]

Reviewer: Since each client sends a delivery receipt, shouldn't we have one more level in here, giving device IDs?

Author: er, yes. Good catch!

        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Typically, a client would send a delivery receipt with
[`POST /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/:roomId/receipt/:type/:eventId`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidreceiptreceipttypeeventid), like so:

```text
POST /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/!room:example.org/receipt/m.delivery/$event
Content-Type: application/json
{}
```

The server then implies `ts` and sends the resulting EDU to the target event's origin server. The
delivery receipt must only be routed to the target event sender.

> An `m.read[.private]` receipt does *not* imply delivery, but rather that a client either does not
> support delivery receipts or was not able to decrypt the message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Receiving a `m.read[.private]` receipt without a delivery receipt does *not* imply
delivery, but rather that a client either does not support delivery receipts or was not
able to decrypt the message.
```

Was this the intended meaning?

Clients are welcome to implement additional requirements before sending a delivery receipt. For example,
a user setting to disable delivery receipts in public rooms specifically, or all rooms the user is in.
Defaults may be applied which prevent delivery receipts from being sent. It is recommended that delivery
receipts be sent by default for encrypted private rooms (where join rules are not public).

Delivery receipts should not be sent for events prior to a user's join.

If a server receives a duplicate request to send a delivery receipt, it should 200 OK it. This is to
ensure that if a client fails to receive a response it doesn't retry forever.

## Potential issues

If a user sends an event in Matrix HQ, they could potentially receive 50 thousand delivery receipts
multiplied by the number of devices each of those users has. The mobile device could potentially exceed
data limits just receiving these receipts. Servers should bundle delivery receipts to deliver them to
the client rather than sending each one individually.

> **TODO**: Maybe we also limit size or require a client to opt-in with a filter param of some sort?

Reviewer: Random ideas:

- state event indicating whether to send delivery receipts
- only send delivery receipts in rooms up to a certain size
- sender includes a property in the event indicating whether they want to receive delivery receipts

> **TODO**: Maybe we also limit size or require a client to opt-in with a filter param of some sort?

Reviewer 3: Alternatively: Perhaps we could require servers to suppress delivery receipts for public and/or large rooms? This would serve as a fallback for clients that may errorneously send these events, and would also allow servers to specify an upper bound (also see: presence).

Author: I think we probably want to investigate this from a privacy angle rather than technical angle for now, as I'd like privacy to drive technology rather than technology drive privacy.

# MSC4089: Delivery Receipts

A common feature among messaging clients is "delivery receipts". Similar to [read receipts](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#receipts),
delivery receipts denote when a client has received *and* decrypted a given message. They do not
denote whether a user has "seen" that message, such as in a push notification.

In a Digital Markets Act (DMA) world, the need for a protocol to support popular messaging features
rises. This proposal introduces a concept of delivery receipts to Matrix, aiming to be compatible
with potential bridges and protocol converters which need such a feature to operate.

## Proposal

The specification already has a general concept of [receipts](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#receipts),
which is currently in use only by read (or "seen") receipts. We extend this module with a new `m.delivery`
receipt to track individual events being received by the client.

Delivery receipts are sent by all of a user's clients to report back to the event's sender that an
event was decrypted successfully. They are not "up to" markers - they are for singular events. Other

> users in the room do *not* see delivery receipts for events they didn't send.

Reviewer 4: This is a *lot* of data: (messages in a room) * (devices in a room) might be difficult to implement efficiently.

If it *is* doable though, might make more sense for `m.read` also. 🤷

Author: Yea, there's vague ideas about only using delivery receipts in "trusted" rooms, where the number of devices and such is likely to be fewer.

Reviewer 5: Having causal delivery would help us to know what others know, as their event would implicitly ack everything below it (`prev_events`). This does come with cost of having no `gaps` - when you join a room you need to download everything. That's not Client's concern however, but Home Servers'. They are "public inboxes" and they could indeed require causal delivery. Could "delivery receipts" be solved this way?

```text
POST /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/!room:example.org/receipt/m.delivery/$event
Content-Type: application/json
{}
```

The server then implies `ts` and sends the resulting EDU to the target event's origin server. The
delivery receipt must only be routed to the target event sender.

Receiving a `m.read[.private]` receipt without a delivery receipt does *not* imply
delivery, but rather that a client either does not support delivery receipts or was not
able to decrypt the message.

Clients are welcome to implement additional requirements before sending a delivery receipt. For example,
a user setting to disable delivery receipts in public rooms specifically, or all rooms the user is in.
Defaults may be applied which prevent delivery receipts from being sent. It is recommended that delivery
receipts be sent by default for encrypted private rooms (where join rules are not public).

Delivery receipts should not be sent for events prior to a user's join.

If a server receives a duplicate request to send a delivery receipt, it should 200 OK it. This is to

> ensure that if a client fails to receive a response it doesn't retry forever.

Reviewer 6: That sounds like a PUT rather than POST?

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 4: Is there any interaction with message edits? Do you still consider it delivered if the initial message was?

Reviewer 6: I would consider the original delivered and the edit delivered when I get an extra delivery receipt for the replacement event. same as read receipts? am i missing something?
